Transcript of Interview with Will Marshall

When I was at NASA, a lot of people focused on finding other planets around other stars systems. And it is absolutely and abundantly clear this is the nicest planet we've ever found. I mean, not by a little way, by a really long way. Right, now, we have found some planets that seem to be close to in the habitable zone. That's the zone of a planet to be where it has liquid water and in terms of its distance from its star, so it has potential for life, we haven't discovered.

And yet I think it seems likely that we'll find it eventually. But until and unless we do, and even when we do, it's definitely rare.

We could be the only ones. This life is incredibly rare.

Welcome to The Regeneration Will Be Funded. My name is Matthew Monahan, and in this series, we're exploring

the intersections of regenerative finance, technology and our living planet.

Created with Ma Earth, you can find all of our conversations and more at maearth.com.

Thanks for joining us.

Today's guest is Will Marshall, co-founder and CEO of Planet Labs.

Will is highly intelligent and cogent. I've had multiple people tell me this is their favorite conversation

that we've recorded so far in this discussion. Will offers his perspective on the state of the planet,

why he believes that we have our environmental priorities wrong, what he thinks should be the order of operations, summarizing

three key priorities for addressing our ecological crisis. And despite the dire state of affairs, Will thinks that

transformational change is possible in as little as one year and offers a few other reasons to be hopeful as well.

We go into how satellites can play an influential role in catalyzing

change and a specific ingredient that will be critical for this innovation. I ask Will, where does Web3 fit into all of this?

And he also shares what he believes is a higher leverage point than technology. I appreciate Will for sitting down to have this conversation.

It was recorded at the Eco-Weaving Gathering in May 2023. Let's dive in, Will Marshall.
What is Planet

We're here with Will Marshall. Will is the co-founder and CEO of Planet.

Thanks for being here, Will. Hey, no worries. Let's start with Planet. What is Planet? What do you do? Okay, well, start from the top then.

Planet We have built satellites that, uh, about a couple of hundred in orbit.

Now, that image, the whole earth every day, tracking changes. Fundamentally, it's about you can't manage things unless you measure them.

So we are. I, you know, as as as Buckminster Fuller would say on Spaceship Earth,

it's a spacecraft with 8 billion or so astronauts on board and actually lots more, if you count the other species

hurtling around the sun. And you have to take care of the spaceship and you can't take care of a spaceship if you don't have data on it on a fast

enough timescale or more practically put, for example, if you're trying to track and stop deforestation in the Amazon.

You need the data about where the felling is taking place. That's illegal on days, time or weeks timescales

because that's the timescale on which it happens, not months or years. If you wake up at the end of the year and there's a report telling you where the trees were going down, that's a bit too late, you know,

now know where it's happened, but you can't do anything about it. It's the data inside the decision making loop of human operations

so that we can take care of Spaceship Earth. And that ranges from disaster response to agriculture, food to

peace and security through to the kind of sustainability things that we do day to day.

And so information inside that human decision making look for making smarter decisions. Hmm, great.

And maybe just to give people a sense of planet, if they're not familiar. So now you're public benefit company.

Mm hmm. Roughly like the size and scope of the operation. Yeah, well, we started the company about ten years ago as a spin out of NASA,

where a few of us have been pioneering small satellite technology. I just went back there the other day as really fun going on out on. And

basically we had launched some phones into space and they had worked and we were like first six orders of magnitude lower cost than the,

the traditional billion dollar satellites that NASA put up. And we're like, okay, can we do more of those more frequently?

Anyway, long story short, at this stage we're we left with seven people and now we're about 1000

and did a couple hundred million in revenue last year growing quite fast with my sense.

Yeah. And as you say, we went public a year and a half ago as a public benefit corporation, which essentially meets the fiduciary duties of the directors

to be broader based, not just focused on shareholder value, although that's one thing that they get to look out for, but also the mission of the company,

in which case in our case, that's basically using space to help life on earth. And so they really have to think about that.

That's their fiduciary obligations as director of planet. And that's important, right?

We've got to align our businesses and corporations around the world with the interests of the planet.

And so that that's why we went that way. It's a new form of cooperation. Only ten or so organizations have gone

that way at the time we went public. I don't know what the count is now, but I think it's an important advance on

on on legal structures for companies. Yeah, Yeah. 100% agree.
Life is incredibly rare

So as someone who looks at the Earth for a living

and studies the state of affairs, like what is what is this going on? A logical state of our planet right now. Well,

from 10,000 feet or in our case, 500 kilometers,

it's a bit of a mess. I mean, it's a beautiful planet that that's the first thing you notice. The second thing you notice is it's changing all the time.

But if you really dive into the details, yeah, it really does get unfortunate very quickly.

Mainly human impact on precious ecosystems. Uh, so but

the beauty never ceases to amaze me. We download about 4 million images a day.

It's about 47 megapixels. It's a huge amount of images. Obviously, I didn't look at it all, but we have various channels like

segmenting the imagery and, um, yeah, it's,

it's like we've, we've spent and when I was at NASA's

people focused on finding other planets around other stars systems. And it is absolutely and abundantly clear this is the nicest planet

we've ever found. I mean, not by a little way, by a really long way, right now we have found some planets that seem to be close to in the habitable zone.

That's the zone of the planet to be where it has liquid water in terms of its distance from its star. So there's potential for life we haven't discovered.

And yet I think it seems likely that we'll find it eventually. But until and unless we do and even when we do, it's definitely rare.

We could be the only ones. This life is incredibly rare. I think I do the thought experiment like if you were an A.I.

and you woke up on the planet and we might be going through that episode in coming years,

what would you do? What would you think is your purpose in life? What you know, If you were to be thinking about your go function on your own,

what would you be? And first thing you probably guys look out in the universe and go, Wow, if you had some ideas,

all of human knowledge on Wikipedia looking up and looking down

the earth is extremely unusual. It's a vast universe, mostly rocks and dead matter

gases in between interstellar distances, between galaxies and between stars.

And almost none of it is life. And I don't sense saying it's 99.9 99% drop.

You'd have to be having nines through most of the rest of this interview before you get to the, you know, anything lifelike.

So it's mostly rocks and dust by ridiculous abundance. Even if you just measured the earth, it's 99.99%.

But rocks and dead matter, life matter is extraordinarily unusual

no matter what. And that gives an extra motivation, I think an impetus to taking seriously the

keystone species role on this planet and helping to shoot it. And tell us more about the
Ecocide and biodiversity loss

the state of the planet in terms of what do you see as the main

challenges and areas for concern? Well, I think the best summary of the challenge is really focused on the ecocide.

And so I think a lot of people are very aware of the environment challenge generally and loosely aware that it sort of

fits into the climate peace and the biodiversity piece. But if I drove down a little bit on that,

I think it's important to understand the state of affairs. The biodiversity is

really at a huge pressure point right now. We really the we have lost about 70% of life

in populations terms over the last 40 years. So since we've been accurately measuring it, in a sense,

the IPCC did the study. This is the UN group that really studies the biodiversity on the planet and,

and they looked at populations of different species across amphibians and birds and mammals and plants and, and and on average

we're seeing about a 70% decline in numbers over the last 40 years,

which is gobsmacking. It's about 82% of mammals are gone. So they're an you know, you're your wild boar

or your elephants and drop or whatever, 82% of those gone by numbers.

So, you know, most of them, two thirds of the birds, 75%

of fish in freshwater lakes and rivers, most of the insects, about 70% of the insects

and over half the world's forests, over half the world's coral reefs. And that's already happened.

Now, actually, the biodiversity is like the number of species. We haven't knocked off too many yet. We're we're killing them at a ridiculous.

The extinction rate has gone up about 100 X to a thousand x over the pre human or the pre-industrial evolution rate of change of species

that we can look back at the fossil record and see how quickly they were going extinct. We've made 100 x to a thousand

x change in the rate of extinction, So we're definitely massively changing it.

But actually by numbers, you know, we've got millions of species and the number of species

that are actually going extinct that we know of so far, although there's a lot of gaps, is pretty small with retaining

about 25% of species, which sucks. I mean, in the amphibian world it's like more 90%.

And then and in others it's much less. But on the aggregate, 25%. But luckily we haven't got to the point where we've really culled.

And so we've got members of most species, we've declined their populations radically. So it's really an ecocide that's the right word.

Frans Timmermans, the EU commissioner calls it, then I think it's great that because it's not just about biodiversity loss, not they're about the diversity,

it's also about the population, because once you get below a certain population, especially when you worry about it really becoming into mass extinction, why

is it some paper that looked at forest degradation as you take out trees randomly

from a forest? What point that it's sort of this is a curve of how much biodiversity it has and it just disappears and a certain knee in the curve

because at some point the fragments get too far apart and then then the the biology can't get between them. Why do you feel

biodiversity is so important? Well, there's many reasons to think about it, but the most important is so the value

that it has intrinsically. So how the UN talks about it

and all these formal international meetings is what they call NBS nature based services, which I think is super important

and we should value that and I'll come to that in a second. But intrinsically part of my point about life in the universe,

these things should be valuable to us because we value life

and the fantastic diversity that provides. And then secondly,

roughly half of the economy or more is dependent on it. We can't get clean water without nature.

Nature does all of our cleaning services. It cleans the air, it gives us the oxygen. It it basically without nature, we are screwed.

I mean, we might think of ourselves as a technological organization or a society, but we are very early on that journey. And right now the vast majority

of our materials and cleaning and resources are provisioned by nature.

Getting rid of that at your peril. We are systematically reducing the numbers and at some point one

worries that it jumps over and you lose the species diversity en mass.

So this ecocide is the main problem in the environment space as there's also the climate problem ecosystem.

The ecocide is being driven by a number of factors. Climate change is not the main one.

The main one is human encroachment onto into habitat. That's deforestation,

and that's principally caused, caused by changing forests into agricultural lands

for cattle and palm oil and things like that. So when you buy palm oil or beef, you are in most cases,

especially in the West, you're driving deforestation in the Amazon and then it's overfishing in the oceans

and dredging and things like that that just kills life then as opposed to warming, which then could threaten

those species. That's considered the third factor, but it's quite a distant third present time.

If we keep on our way of warming the climate, that might become a dominant factor in the future. But we're already causing the ecocide, even without climate change,

is my main point that climate change doesn't matter. Per say we only care about climate change in as much as it hurts us and the rest of life.

And that's not the driving factor right now. And so I think human humanity has got that priority a little bit one way round.

I'm not saying don't focus on climate. I am saying that we should focus more on the eco piece. So rather than our leverage point being reduced carbon emissions,

what you're saying is, well, first stop, habitat destruction. Absolutely. And in fact if you fix that, you fix most of climate and not vice versa.

Roughly speaking, you know, the the the forest of the lungs of our planet. And and same with the oceans, with the seagrass and the plankton,

and that's pulling down the CO2 and. Yeah. So how do you feel about this

big megatrend towards electrification. Yeah. So that's, that's, that is important. But I would say it's secondary to the love of the planet.

So even if you turn off all the coal power plants and turn them into solar panels and wind farms tomorrow,

that didn't stop the fact that we're wiping out the forests. And so that's what it's going to do. A lot of mining to support that. Absolutely.

And sometimes these comes there was a great documentary recently about Tesla and the batteries and where that's causing deforestation.

It's not clear what the net net is there, but when again, those forests natively are sucking down CO2.

Right. And the reason is the asymmetry is that if you if you keep nature,

if you just let those forests grow back, you suck down more CO2. Whereas if you turn all the coal power plants into renewables,

you you don't automatically stop the destruction of the forests, right? So if you save nature in a way, you get climate, say, for free, a lot of the way.

Right? Right. If you solve climate, you don't get nature for free. And so this is why. And then then there was a nature article recently showing that

we're spending about 100 to 1 on climate versus conservation. Yeah.

So not only are we not considering that much funding it ridiculously low,

which is why you can also have big impact with small dollars in conservation. Conservation has become like not sexy now, you know,

like I find in the philanthropic context, it's like, yeah, that's like the previous generation, you know?

And I'm like, well, it's actually more important than ever. More important. And when people are striving to do CO2, carbon capture,

the best technology is nature, right? I mean, the tree, it plants itself.

You don't even have to do anything, but it's not permanent. Well, no. Well, this is yeah, we can get into those debates, but it's like, yeah, yes

I, yeah, I think we've got our priorities that wrong. So environment is the right word.

Climate is a part of it. ecocide is the more important word that we should be focusing upon.

What about the water cycle? Yeah, I think that's part of it, right? That's part of it. And you know, look,

we're going to go through a very tricky time coming up because of the extreme weather that's coming about from climate that's exacerbating things

as well as that coupled with agriculture, which we get to do. But but look, yeah, I think that conservations where

that that sounds like old school but and but we have some technologies that can speed up this transition.

But I think we first need to recognize this society that that's got to be priority one nature. Okay.

So that gives us a bit of a and I guess one more question about the problem.
On tipping points

You know, there's a lot of talk of tipping points and kind of tipping points that are now starting to cascade.

How do you think about that? I don't know enough about it. I think it's very complicated.

Mm hmm. We don't really know. We've worried about that stuff in the past and going through things and then people go away. So there's going to be a tipping point and there wasn't.

And I worry a lot about it. I don't know how you get a handle on it. I read Nature

magazine incessantly, and almost every week there's an article showing a new nonlinear C we hadn't understood before.

Coupling this and that. And that was a1i read

literally yesterday, which was about whether sea lanes, which gave out emissions

and emissions in general caused more clouds. And does that overall net negatively or positively affect and we assumed

it would be net positively effect because it creates more clouds that bounce, more light off. But there's many

and it turns out that it was going the other way. And until we had studied it properly for all sorts of technical reasons, we didn't know it was that way round.

You know, everyone knows about the you know, if you mount water, it becomes less reflective, which then melts more water,

which then becomes less reflective. And that's a bad thing, right? But there's lots of other nonlinearity varieties like that.

Right. And we only begun. But I would say on the whole, we're discovering more and more that going the other direction. Yeah, the Amazon was at one point every time we pump more CO2, it was like,

give me that stuff and it was sucking it down. And then it got to a point with temperature rises where it's just not doing that anymore

and now it's becoming a net negative, as you know. So. Hmm, at some level life was compensating and absorbing a lot of the CO2.

We're putting up some. Of the. Oceans. Same with the oceans, and now it looks like it's reversing. Very dangerous.

We don't know what we're doing. Right? Yeah. I mean, I like and appreciate that you have this
Rewilding a nature reserve

this very rigorous academic and scientific understanding, but then you're leading with humility and honor in like the

the natural state of ecosystems is the North Star. I think so. I mean, you know, right here we're on a a nature preserve

that is about a thousand hectares that we're trying to rewild

mainly so that we can get a sort of hands on understanding of what that means because we help with satellite data, these far flung locations

and what it means on the ground. I wanted to really understand and, you know, get a sense for that. And it's hard work and it takes many years and

and it's complicated because, oh, there's this invasive and that doesn't come over here. And how do you get rid of it and how do you rewilding is is hard.

So it's not just about the data and the tools, but understanding that can help us to build better tools that then fit for the purpose. So people. Yeah, okay.
Reasons for hope

So my experience with you is that you have this, this high degree of like a, a positive urgency.

Yeah. That's grounded in this kind of sense of like, guys, this is really important. We need to act, you know, and you're very solutions focused.

So maybe love the shift from Okay. Yeah, that's the problem now it's. Dire what we do. Yeah, absolutely.

Well, yeah, I definitely am an optimist at heart, and especially

two things. One is when we get out of the way, nature bounces back so fast, we even saw that lately during COVID.

Yeah, that was a great Gary Larson cartoon. That was 2019. All the animals behind bars in the zoo and the humans walking past going,

Oh, no. And then then in 2020 or the humans behind the bars of their own houses and the animals taking back the streets

and waving at them from the other side, you know, so to speak. And the speed at which that happened in a few places was astonishing. Right?

Right. And I was I was scuba diving in the Marshall Islands, which is my island. So I had permission to scuba dive there.

And they had been nuked by the U.S. in the sixties.

They used the Marshall Islands as nuclear weapon target practice,

displacing all the people. Terrible destruction of. Yeah. Sea life is back and you can't bloody believe that was ever you know.

Well it's it's the we the amazing thing give nature this but

you don't need to do much more than give her back the space to bounce back. The other thing that gives me hope is technology.

I'm not a techno utopian. I don't believe technology solves all problems, but we've got some and oppressive tools to bring to bear on these challenges.

Now, from satellite data, obviously a passion of mine, it's drones, the sensors on the ground, which all of which

can help us to understand what we're doing and doing this. We can't manage it if we don't measure it. Thing Powerful AI is applied to that to enable us to understand

and get to get to grips with all that means, and then especially to democratize that in a way that's not just Noah. With teams of scientists

that can understand climate models and PhDs by the thousand, but rather individuals and NGOs or citizen scientists or whatever, can

get to grips with how to help because it democratizes the access to that.

And then as we're seeing already, which actually put you in a way, and then finally all the smart contracts and other things of web3 technologies

that can glue it all together in a way that actually in the main business, to avoid the middleman in a way and go straight

from big corporations like myself that wants to buy carbon credits to the to the per the indigenous people in Bolivia

that are stewarding some part of their forest and can be paid for the carbon credits and to save their voice.

You know. So I want to dive into all of those pieces because you're so sophisticated in your understanding of the tech,
The top 3 priorities

but maybe before we get there, like how would you frame the if you were, you know, emperor of Earth and you were like, okay, we have to,

you know, organize and address this ecological emergency. What would be

the rough order of operations? Where would you focus? Yeah, yeah. Well, I'm CEO of Planet. I mean, if you just But the planet not just can

take some hubris out of me. Anyway, I think it's actually simpler than people think.

At least a frame up. Terribly complicated in some of the execution details. But.

But some people don't like the idea of surmising in a quick way because it's like, well, you've missed all the detail. Right?

I think it's important that we get in on a rough page about the main parties. And if I were to summarize them, there's really only three.

One is we need to make more room for nature to come back. Yeah, we need to stop the push back and actually give land back to nature by this.

Roughly, semis is a 30 by 30 project. That is the goal to have 30% of land and 30% of ocean waters

in the right regions by the way, protected for nature, i.e. in this form of park or in any case preserve

not for take over by humans. Right. But by 2030 and. By 2010. Global agreement that happened in Montreal. Exactly.

And then so that's number one. And that will help a lot with biodiversity

and it will help a lot with climate too. And

by the way, the immediate sub goal, I kind of want to make the sort of 1% by 2025,

which is that there's this key biodiversity areas of the planet where 90% of the remaining biodiversity is in 1% of the landmass

on the land. Biodiversity for example, a tiny fraction of the that yeah, we need to preserve them like mountain. Exactly.

And so it's just this so tiny said that bird orientation is 80% by 2025

80% of of the Amazon we're at 74% right now.

Yeah and basically like the tipping points around 80 and so we need to not just stop the destruction, but

we actually need to start broad scale reforestation. Right? And you start with lands that have been turned into agriculture

in the last 25 years and close to the other forested areas. That's where we need to stop. So what you're saying is

the sub point of 3030 is let's let's make sure the. Key biodiversity is saved now we need it now. Just absolutely need to prioritize it.

It's insane that we're not. Yeah, well, to the back of the money, like there's this great documentary which I encourage everyone

to listen to wildlife about the work of Chris and Doug Tompkins, who

actually only spent about $100 million or something of that order and save parks all across

Chile and Argentina, totaling an area, some huge amount of area,

and it's just piddling amounts of money compared with what we're spending on climate

to save the rest of that 1% of the biodiversity, which gives us the seed content. Sure, that we have everything else.

It's like the biobank nature's binding. Yeah. So that's so that's the 30 by 30. That's probably number. One.

You know. The priority number two is sustainable food.

We've got to move to sustainable agriculture because for multiple reasons, it's like a win win win win for

sustainable agriculture practice, like where you reduce tilling, use cover crops and things like that. It draws down carbon rather than throwing it up.

So it's a massive potential carbon sink. And secondly, we need to do it anyway because otherwise

we're not going to have any. We turning all these agricultural land into dust bowls. I recently read that most of the deforestation

is because of agriculture, but if you look the total out of agriculture, it's not going up. Why? Because at the other end we're turning a decent fraction

of agricultural land every year into dust bowls. So we needed to save the existing agricultural land.

A lot of farmers want to go into sustainable agriculture just because one reason they want a farm in ten years, you know,

we're whittling away the soil nutrients by turning them over. And then there is biodiversity reason, you know, it brings back biodiversity.

Yeah. Wendell Berry quote. You know, no use getting enlightened if you can't keep the topsoil from blowing away. Exactly.

Yeah. Yeah. Well so so and then the same on fisheries. We've got to do sustainable fishing.

I mean and, and there we've got less than I because most of us are not easy most of the time. Yeah.

And my God we're trying our hardest to fuck that up. Excuse my French life.

And you know, you can see that that this film was it called

Seaspiracy. Exactly is a great one for just getting calibrated. Yeah. And what you mean by by, you know, whatever.

A dolphin free tuna. Yeah. And just the trawling nets like just the jobs of just about.

Yes. So sustainable foods And actually we know what to do that

we know how to do sustainable agriculture in a way that it doesn't, it does reduce carbon and produces as much crops and keeps the farm for forever.

It actually no one's misaligned that the farmers get better yield. They we all get better food.

So it's health as well. It's certainly environmental health, but we do have to do some structural reforms.

The American Farmers Act doesn't allow doesn't underwrite the insurance.

If you use that, then let's use the big ag practices, which is not that these just

so the farmers don't swap because of this, you know. Yeah, there's higher yields on fossil fuel inputs and that requires different cost structures

and there's risk. And there's transition. Yeah, Yeah, exactly. No, So it's not a trivial, but it's not a like no.

What if we know what it, it and then and by the way a related point to that, there's some point on the,

the 30 by 30 is key biodiversity is some point here it's changing diets and

like we cannot do Western meat consumption right and live on this planet

and have the rest of life right just doesn't what right no matter how you say in fact sustainable meat

production takes up far more land than we just don't have. So it's better if yeah, ethically,

who wants the mass? Many mass animal farms, those are atrocious. I mean, those are mass killing facilities.

The genocide of our day, those are the switches of our day. So we can't have that.

But you can't also have everyone living on beef that takes up large areas of land. We just got too many people. We cannot we do not have the land for it.

You're saying as don't go from mass factory farming where we have all the animals stuck in together and go, Oh great, now we're going to graze them

sustainably by littering them across all of the land. Not at the rate we waste is consuming meat with 8 billion people.

Something has to give you the after mass killing of the humans. No one likes that solution.

You have to mass kill all the rest of life or you have to change diets. And frankly, it's pretty obvious which one has to go right. And we can reclaim

meat as more of a treasured meal that is done much more sparingly. It doesn't mean, like

I don't think it's like everyone go vegan tomorrow second. Right? Exactly. It it doesn't need to be that big step.

It's just a reduction back to what we used to have just totally two decades ago, in fact.

I mean, when, you know, it's just a couple of meat members a week rather than all the time and there's lots of meat substitutes

that are also going to help us. Yeah, but dietary change has to come with that. You can't have China and India and other big countries only.

India is mostly vegetarian, thankfully, but like changing to a Western style diet just doesn't add up.

I mean, it already is laying waste to the Amazon, you know, that is what's called that. Totally. And then the third pillar is this is the one everyone knows,

which is the coal power plants have to go out. You know, I mean, it's a bit more than that.

We have to electrify or buy houses. We have to turn our gas ovens into induction ovens.

We have to you know, that's an infrastructure. The cars, the, you know, the is electrifying everything.

And basing it on renewables. So it's. So interesting.

I, I don't know if you know just in winters from winters no so we interviewed her recently this on the series

and I'll just give a pitch for people to see her interview. You know she was responsible for for helping the DiCaprio foundation

for many years started One Earth and they have three pillars of their strategy and they're the exact same three

how get right, which is really renewable energy. The conservation piece she takes it to also the level of 5550.

It's really about half of the oceans by 2050, right. Per year. Wilson's suggestion. Yeah. Yeah, exactly.

And then regenerative. Agriculture. Yeah. No, I think that's right. So so actually, if we focus on that, I'll give a hopeful vision
Rapid response is possible

When society wants to make something of her. See, we can do miraculous things.

COVID. We went from working in offices to working at home,

from shaking hands and shaking hands from like all these changes overnight

to put together a massive infrastructure to make vaccines, to doing all this stuff, you know, in a couple of months. Yeah, we if we have wiped out

70% of life on the earth in four months rather than 40 years,

we would be treating this as an emergency. But because it went so slow, it was way more on the more and. More bugs on the winter before.

Yeah, I. Think there was. Yeah, I don't really know. It's just it's too slow a rate for us to notice like frogs boiling or whatever

I don't like but look how fast if we declare something emergency.

I mean I sometimes wake up this vision like if I, if it became head of a country,

I think you could put a country on a war like footing change most of the way on these three things I just said in a year.

I mean, I'm not talking a decade, right? I think you could have even a 100 day plan that would get you halfway that right.

Like it's not even that hot. The farmers can do that to shift. The humans can make that dietary change, right?

They we can preserve more parks. We did a big part. I mean, America, we're here in America where there's a

huge generation of parks at one stage. We need to do that again. We need to, you know, was it Roosevelt who called for the environment courts,

you know, like the Peace Corps, You know, but a conservation court. That's yeah, yeah, yeah.

Uh, like so 30 by 30. Yeah. Sustainable food and the renewable energy. Renewable energy. Yeah.

And, and I think you can do a lot of that way in, in a year. Yeah. And I don't want to exaggerate to make the point, but I mean, if we'd treated it

anything like the party that we had for covered for the Ukraine or for the financial collapse

of Greece and banks. Right. Or any of that level of poverty, we would solve that most of the way anyway.

Right? That's my contention and that's my hope that, you know, if we got a new era of politicians that took this at that level like war like

and I think humans would understand, the citizens would understand why we got to do it. Yeah. You know,

as Gavin Newsom, governor here in California says, if you don't believe in climate change, just spend a few months in California like we have.

Ridiculous floods, then followed by crazy wildfires. And so you feel like people are understanding and grasping

it. I think they're beginning to, in their core, can't ignore that things have changed when they speak to their their uncle

grand grandmother and they hear about what it was like before. And I know we never had snow here before and now we do, or vice versa or,

you know, because it's extreme weather that you first can find. It's not all in the direction of warm, which is obviously the counter-narrative

that knows climate warming isn't happening is that when it's colder than we expect? But like,

yeah, I think anyone that's where the perception and perspective I was going to point out there's less animals

that want on these things and there's more extreme weather events, which is exactly what the scientists told us 50 years ago now. Right, Right.

Okay. So we have that road map in front of us. Let's talk about tech now and.
How satellites are a catalyst

Okay, so you mentioned satellites. Let's start there. You know, like help people who may just hear satellites, things orbiting up in space,

taking pictures maybe, but like help us understand the nuance and the profundity of this moment that we're in in terms of what these

enable. Yeah, well, firstly, let me calibrate. I think that most of the things we were just talking about

don't need new technology, right? We don't need America. Insert miracle here, right? In our strategy, we actually know everything we need to do.

In fact, in some senses, some of the AG stuff is going back to what we do before in the conservation and we've been doing that for,

you know, over 100 years. Most of our our ag playbook is, is removing all of these additives and amendments in the soil

getting back to more hand based tools and, you know, higher labor inputs

but living in better right relationship with the cycle. Well, luckily, air is going to get rid of most of people's jobs if they're in front of the computer.

So now we're going to get into some of the boogeyman fields. We went from like 80% of people doing agriculture

to 20% or something, and now we're going to need to take some of them. But luckily we're. I'm one of my friends.

He went way down the rabbit hole a few months back and he came out, you know, like

bleary eyed and said, you know, my old conclusion is we all go outside. Yeah. Yes. But anyone that's in front of a computer

do your job. I put myself in this room. You know, it's looking. Better. Right now.

Whereas anyone that's doing plumbing in agriculture. Right. Cleaning.

Yeah. These are really hard. You know, if you're in front of a computer, mind is mean, including if you're a computer programmer.

Right. There threatening not to. Ironically, the computer programmers are putting themselves out of a job.

But anyway, back to the point. Yeah. So we don't need the tech but we. Don't need the tech.

But, but it can accelerate. Right. And that's that's what it's a is a catalyst. Right.

I think the biggest change that would help us in agriculture is your and us changing the agriculture policies.

That would be the fastest way to do that. But in the meantime, we can damn well help with satellite data as an example.

So we can tell the crop type and crop yield in each three by three meter bulk of every farmer's field on every field in every country

on the planet. And that and it just become possible or. That's only become fuzzy in the last couple years.

How does that and why does that matter? Well, it matters because the farmer needs to know if there's a blight.

When is more water? When it's fertilizer? Preferably not blanket fertilizer, but just in the area you need

so that we don't then create runoff that kills lots of life in the rivers

and reduces their costs, all of these sort of things. So what we call precision agriculture,

it's digital agriculture now moving towards these sustainable practices. Can we monitor from space aided increased crop yields

and do the sustainable ag practices which holds the carbon in the ground, by the way, gives them a talented source of income,

which is carbon farming, should they should be paid for pulling that down on behalf of every that Western society that is benefiting from them

putting the carbon down, which we all need them to do. So if I'm managing a farm, we'll be able to use satellite information to identify problem areas potentially automatically.

Yeah, you know, essentially getting a. Farmer wake up in the morning, Why do I need to work? Well, these fields, these corners do this, this.

I'd like to have some more water over there and and, and these ones that need harvesting soon.

This is the date you should do it and so on. And all that sort of information can be aided. And you can detect carbon

from space. Well, we can in the in above ground. So that is in the crops themselves or in the trees.

But we can't in the soil. Right. We can tell the soil moisture level in the top five or ten centimeters using a passive microwave signal.

And we're working on figuring out how we could tell this carbon directly. But what we can do today, tons of carbon in the soil so we can measure it

aboveground and the carbon in the soil where most of the carbon is 80% or more on land is

we can measure that. We can look at the practices to monitor are they using tilling or cover crops and other things that we know from other specific research sites

are correlated very strongly with carbon, so it might increase the error bars rather than a direct measurement, but it's still

an indirect measurement, which can help policies. And the EU is already doing that. They're adding subsidies

if the farmers use these sustainable farming practices and we're helping them monitor that to enable that those farmers to get those subsidies.

So it's happening, but we can speed this up Most places on the planet, even in the EU, which has this policy,

are not using the satellite data, even though that could. So they're not doing this sustainable practices because they don't know how to monitor that and to prove it to

then get the subsidy. Well, we can help them speed that up. I and back to the

thing that's driving deforestation to the problem. Number one, that's commodities.

The EU has a new piece of legislation which actually um, for the top seven commodities coming into the EU, right.

Like palm oil and beef and other things, they have to prove where they came from, but they did not cause the deforestation,

right? Well, we can help that that sort of thing is impossible without satellite data to say, oh, this came from this area

of this area of Indonesia. And we need and yes, it didn't did or didn't cause deforestation there.

But so by having that kind of a picture of everywhere on the planet, over time, you can essentially verify and prove

whether deforestation happened or didn't happen and. Who caused it. And then we can determine what we do about that.

Right? Right. And so our supply chains are going to essentially start to have much more source data and origination data back

their geo coordinates and certification. And you can't just do this, you know. Oh, no, no, I got over that. No, no, I got it over there.

So people don't get to know whether it was. Deforestation free, you know? Exactly.

Exactly. Prove it. Yeah, prove. It. And so this is where the satellite. It's not just a solution.

It's how do we create those feedback loops that those measurements, that data

back to our systems. Both of the people that farmers are trying to improve this and for the regulators that are trying to check

that is indeed happening and verifying, Yeah, measurement, verification, reporting. I want to get just a little bit further into like why now?

Like why we've had satellites for a long time. You mentioned, you know, being able to put a cell phone up in space.

And so there's like the miniaturization, but like what else is happening that's that's creating this now effect? Well, the main is exactly that.

It's it's miniaturization that's led to about a thousand fold increase in cost performance of satellites

over the last 5 to 10 years, which is a big change, four. Thousand fold decrease in cost, you know, basic basically.

Yeah, Well. That is akin to the mainframe to desktop

computer revolution. Mm hmm. I'm not claiming it's going to have the same degree of effect,

but it's certainly unleashing a lot of greenfield opportunities for doing satellites in different ways that give us different things.

And the main upshot is more data, right? What we're having is two main kinds of satellites, the communications

satellite satellites, StarLink, Oneweb, enabling more places like where we're sitting to have access to Internet without having to put

cables everywhere. And the other thing is Earth observation data helps us understand what's going on around the planet.

So even though we can talk about all the spacecraft, including the rockets and they've decreased in cost of about four X in the last 5 to 10 years.

So the dominant factor is the satellites increase, but the rocket pieces help as well. There's compounding effect.

But the upshot is a data upshot and it's all about the earth and the US economy and how we can help advance the US economy

and speed up the transition digital transition and sustainability transition right. And even though a lot of people now understand
The role of data

through the lens of chat chip t you know, there has been a machine learning renaissance or revolution that precedes chat activity

for some time and the currency, the oil that it runs on is data. Absolutely right.

So, so help us understand how those two worlds converge. It's a great question and area.

Yeah well as the economists put it and you're sort of saying that is the new oil hopefully is not as dirty as oil, it is the fuel for all these digital

transformation and sustainability transformations of the global economy, which is a multitrillion dollar shift

in each case. So, uh, yeah, you don't have anything useful in

AI until you train it on data. It is literally zero value before it has data because you have nothing, no outputs unless you train on data.

So it's all about the training data. You will notice that Google Open source is a lot of that AI through TensorFlow and other things.

They don't open source much of their data. There's a reason one is their proprietary asset

that they consider their moat and the other is is getting more commoditized.

And I think that, you know, so yeah. Yeah. We've got a the most of the chatter about things that changed in the last language

on as a change on the the corpus of the text on the Internet. They haven't really been trained much on satellite data. You know.

But the but we've had computer vision for some while doing an object detection. There's a tree, there's a house, there's a car, the plane,

and then we can count things. And that's useful, but we're definitely going to go. And for example, we did a bit of work in Turkey

and Ukraine doing building damage assessments for the earthquake, then for the UN, respectively, to help

the UN get displaced people back into their homes in Ukraine. And that was because of the scale of each of those cases.

We wanted to use A.I. to automatically detect the building damage. It's just too many to do manually.

But I think we're going to an interface that looks very chatty. But I'll just tell me what happened in Turkey today.

Oh, there was an earthquake hit as well when his how it relates to previous earthquakes and oh, I see you from your IP. You're here.

The nearest place that needs help is there. This is where the the people are mainly in this stadium. They need blankets and medicine.

And here's a no call FEMA for your area where you can give donations. You know,

so you you're going to have this sort of query about interface. You have semantic understanding of what's going on without having to have a Ph.D.

in geospatial and satellite data, basically. Right. Fascinating. Okay.
Where web3 fits in

And now let's talk about Web three then. Where does that fit in? Well, I think that Web three fits in. I mean, so I'm not a huge advocate of Web three generally.

I mean, I'm not pro against as much as I'm skeptical about all the benefits that are proselytized about it.

A lot of pyramid schemes and other danger zones, as far as I'm saying. But as with all technologies, good and bad stuff. And and I think that

smart contracts can be one of the most amazing things to help us with carbon markets.

So, I mean, fundamentally, stepping back, one one of the ways to accelerate

all of these three major pillars that we spoke about before is to put a price on what we're using in terms of carbon and nature,

both of those things. But a price on that, you need to measure it, you measure it systematically and so on, and you need to create an exchange

between the people that want to buy it like a microsoft or a country or, you know, becomes a company or some kind of country.

And the people that want to sell theirs in exchange for just keeping what they want. So in the example I often give

is this most often indigenous people and somewhere in the Amazon and those indigenous people don't want to clear the land to the farmer

that's saying, I'll give you 50 bucks an acre a year to go palm oil, put cattle on it, which is their trade right now,

and the person just wants to send their kids to school or buy food or basic things and they don't have any money. So

in a lot of these places and there's an economic incentive to cut down the trees,

but from there that we are paying for in the West by being bit by beef burgers and other things,

we're driving that demand. But it's small economics on each acre.

It's crazily small. Totally. But no one's willing to pay them to keep the trees. But everyone benefits if they just keep the trees, right?

So if you can just tip the balance. So what would that take? You know, order 100 bucks an acre or hectare and it's just an order of magnitude terms.

You could tip the balance the other way. Well, that turns out to be roughly the sort of amount or more, but less CO2 is worth from just keeping the trees that. Mm hmm.

If we could only figure that mechanics and that requires. Yeah, it's not like really, but it's. Far more farmer.

Right. Even in today's. Today's carbon, you can. Get to that that sort of level. Right? And if you factor in biodiversity in these places,

it should be much, much more. But we haven't figured out how to measure. That for an entire intact ecosystem that controls the hydrological cycle

of the planet. And we're. Totally. Right. But but if since the economic

and by the way, if someone wants to get mine, then that's worth $1,000,000 isn't going to help. But you know, it's going to help with a lot of the cases a lot of the time,

you know, even to give them 100 bucks an acre, keep the trees. Yeah. And the exchange goes something like this. Microsoft says, I want to buy

certified carbon credits so that I can say at the end of the year I'm net zero carbon offsetting of my execs flying around the planet.

Mm hmm. I mean, this is the person I want to send my kid to school. And somebody offered me some little bit of money to clear the forest and make agriculture up. Somebody else is just offer me

slightly more than that to keep the forest there. Just and all I have to do is agree not to cut down the trees.

Yeah. Great. I'll make that exchange. The satellite data verifies it for both parties that they don't cut it down.

This is how much carbon is. They can Microsoft can knock off their balance sheet to get to carbon

neutrality and the smart contract links it with together. Yeah, there's that's what I see coming together

and that we are on the precipice and that's when you don't allow billions

you allow trillions to flood to this that I'm not into capitalism as the be all end

all of life. In fact, I think there's serious fundamental flaws. But we're not going to suddenly change the fundamentals of capitalism overnight.

Yeah, but with this judo move to value nature, we can add that on as a module under capitalism

and very quickly, transition trillions to the areas of focus, which is the areas that we need, the conservation,

the sustainable agriculture, because we could do the same in agriculture, copper farming as the forestry example I was just doing.

And then you've solved a lot of the problem right there. Yeah.

And so it's shifting, you know, it's shifting incentives. Yeah. And I mean, we have such so much gratitude to pay

to the indigenous people, especially who've been protecting these lands. I mean, like they don't want to cut down the forests and I don't want to speak for them.

But the proof is that the forests are still standing, like there has been ample opportunity for destruction of these habitats

and they've chosen as a broad statement to maintain ecosystems much more intact

than the rest of the world has chosen. Right? So when we're talking about, you know, small amounts of money

to make sure that that continues and that the tide,

which is unfortunately towards deforestation right now, reverses. So instead of 76% of the Amazon, you know, still being intact,

that we get back a total of 80. Yeah, it just makes so much sense that we would use

currency that everyone's using symbolic forms of value exchange like without necessarily saying oh no, that's too close

to financialization of nature or the destruction of capitalism. And to find a way to make this work. Well, absolutely and you're right,
On financializing nature

a lot of the biodiversity is on indigenous peoples land, such as it is, which is greatly diminished. But

and look, I appreciate a lot of conservationists threats when they like don't financialized nature.

That is how we went wrong in the first place. Yeah. So let's just address that from I guess I get that I feel that myself

totally. But we are whittling away in nature at Sutter rates this, you know,

70% of the last 40 years and insane we have to change that really fast.

The world today runs on capitalism everywhere from China to the US.

You know the one the commonality is I'm not saying that's a good thing

but that a changing overnight. We may need to come up with some other plan and some longer term,

but for now we have to that that would take decades. We haven't got decades.

We've got singles of years at best. Really. We've got a lot of time already, you know, So

this is the way that I think we get. It's a band, a band aid in the sense of the arc of history.

Yeah, but as a band, we got in it. Yeah, Yeah. If the patient comes to the hospital, you know, just got hit by a car

and has all these broken bones and, you know, it's like you can't just.

They will. We don't want to, you know, put you under for surgery because we don't like the anesthesia. Like, it's like you have to take some dramatic action

to first save the patients and allow the healing process to happen. And I guess like

the way I interpret the way I'm trying to feel it now is like the gravity and the weight I feel of the like existential dread

of anything that that does feel like it's a it's like a risks commodifying or financialized nature.

It's like to take that as the responsibility to really dive into the nuance of the implementation of these systems

and to take it with a very serious responsibility, knowing that we're and also very dangerous territory to start saying that that piece of land

is worth X to this Indigenous community. And, you know, because as soon as we do that, we know it is very dangerous because it

it can kind of also mean the opposite, which is that rather than the intrinsic value of nature being recognized,

we're saying, oh well, no, it's only good because it's $10,000 per hectare. But that means if someone's willing to pay 10,001, then okay, cut it down.

Right. Like we're extracting a system that can allow for that when we bring things into the numeric form,

which is also why we can't isolate it only to the finance. You know, we have to think about the policy. We have to think about the culture.

We have to think about the social norms. Yeah, No, no question. Yeah. And, you know, I really

feel like the other challenge here is that, well, we've we've had this asymmetric

exploitation relation with the developed world. It should be the exploited world,

I mean, massively exploited by domineering countries. And we're still running on an and an economic system

that is economic imperialist system, you know, And so if I was an indigenous person in a forest in the Amazon,

I would Damo would be skeptical, Oh, here's white turning up again

the next folks are we've seen that very soon and I'm not going that I. I can only imagine the skepticism

to this sort of idea and yet I do think there's a way through here, as you say, with with careful, nuanced thinking about, hey,

that's been sure that no matter if there's any upside to that carbon credit, it doesn't just go to myself to get shared.

Right. In a way that really cements, oh, people being getting value

out of that rather than just the capitalist that, you know, the only ones that get value out of the creative benefits. Generally

in our present economic system. By doing some of those things, I think you can make headway. But, you know, that's. Yeah, it's. I definitely get the caution.

It's a bit like a geoengineering. Like, do we do it? Do it not when, when it gives us this sense of,

oh, we can just pollute everywhere. So let's not focus on mitigating the problem in the first place. We just fix it by putting out shades or whatever.

But at this point in these crises, to not think about these tools

when we have so you were talking about, you know, tipping points. We don't know where we're out in those.

We cannot risk wasting away another 20% on top of that 70% of biodiversity and risk that we cannot

and that that course correction has to happen in the next year or two. Otherwise, we're home. Yeah well I think yeah,

when you talk about the nuance and the speculative nature, like if Microsoft buys credit and it's worth something,

I think that's one distinction that's emerging, which is like the resell ability and where does that benefit go?

You know, like what is financial speculation versus, you know, more about offsetting and retiring those credits?

I think there's there's big distinctions and things there. There's big distinctions around are we building ecosystem service markets

that are more supply led or demand led? You know, is it is it really in service to the land stewards and the foresters

and the farmers versus the the buyers, the Microsoft sort, the speculators? And Gregory Landau,

who did an interview, you know, he he articulated that really well. Yeah. And and then there's one other distinction I was going to say, which is the

the governance. You know, it's like ultimately who gets to decide which types of credits are being sourced found in the territory.

I think this is an area where I'm maybe a bit less skeptical and more hopeful about Web three, which is,

I think that what crypto brings in terms of being able to unleash

just a multitude of governance experiments and restructure governance,

there's so much made of the financialization of what crypto offers, but I do think governance is going to be one of the big frontiers

now. Absolutely. And we've got so that it gives us a lot of options space to get it right.

And I think there's a lot of willingness where there's a tweaks to what we know and are used to, to to accept that we've got to make changes

now. I mean, I think that that the challenge here, there's a few challenges to this sort of vision of
Challenges with carbon accounting

of proper carbon accounting. One is that

we don't have good registries of of who owns what in order to do this. And we have a good measurement of carbon.

But somebody says, I can protect the forest, you know, they're the person that is sort of authorized to do that. So that's you know, that's not somebody else is going to come along and come down,

you know, have the faculties and the legal authority to enact it. And a second one is all those governance

and financial nuances to ensure that we get it right. You know, but I think Web3 can really help with that

and stitch the pieces together without just benefiting the middlemen.

I think the bigger challenge is going to be how we append the value of nature into to that, because no one has yet agreed

on what we are measuring. That was the tonne of carbon equivalent

as ideas in that realm, and there's some good ideas, but we need some sort of international common understanding of what that's going to be.

And secondly, we don't know how exactly how to measure it either, but we know it's very valuable.

In fact, you know, to early conversation is probably more valuable than the carbon piece. Yeah,

right now carbon is a good proxy to get going because biodiversity is lots of carbon.

It's not ideal, it really isn't because it doesn't convey the complexity of the ecosystems or the biodiversity or anything else.

But it does get us along the way and it's something we can measure today and to the time urgency there's no way

that we can get to that agreed upon measurement and how we measure it in the relevant time frame. So that's that.

We're going to append carbon to capitalism and we're going to append biodiversity carbon for a little bit. Yeah.

Until we figure this stuff out. Yeah, I guess the counter, the counter argument. Yeah I, I resonate with what you're saying.
Solutions for different timescales

I think the counter argument that I hear that I'm still sitting with is like that. The, the thinking that got us here won't get us out of this mess

or that if we, if we start with urgency that maybe that's not the medicine that it's really about slowing down.

And I try to internalize the lessons of that kind of thrust of thinking. And I still end up back in now wanting to use these tools

to measure nature to grow better incentives and feedback loops and mechanisms so that we can use our financial markets in service to life.

Yeah. Yeah, no doubt. I mean, the long term solution is much more in education than it is in

adding carbon to the economy. It's much more and cultural evolution

and I just think humanity has to have a suite of tools for different time scales. Yeah, we're doing the best we can now as a species to evolve.

And I just think these technology can help us do that. Band Aid is a technology and a little technology

to help us get there, you know, like quicker is the idea. No but is it better than not? Absolutely.

And so it's look, it's not perfect, but you're in a messy place. I let and I just and by the I think back to the point
Wills final remarks

about the perspective here, the planetary perspective,

life is so rare. We cannot afford to be whittling away

on biodiversity or numbers to something that we don't know how to replace. It's like Earth is irreplaceable.

And if a band aid saves those key biodiverse areas from further encroachment

by yes, okay. Not imperfect, imperfectly, valuing nature and imperfectly valuing carbon

and these things and sticking on the side of capitalism. Ugly as it is, I take it any day we we cannot lose the life on earth.

I agree. The urgency is part of what's caused a lot of our challenges. But I think it's more the growth mindset

and growth at all costs and all this sort of stuff. Our economy is putting up against planetary boundaries.

And by the way, the planet's going to win. But how long are we going to take before we notice that? And, you know,

so I think we've got to do the best job we can, turning right hand corner pretty quickly to go from 70%

ecocide in in 40 years to almost zero in a couple of years. You know, we've got to and then give it back

to the 30 by 30 objective and that's not not simple but we know what we need to do.

We have the tools that can enable us today. So I'm actually optimistic about that, despite everything.

But Marshall. Thanks for your time. It's lovely to. Well,

I hope you enjoyed that conversation with Will. It's such a punch in the stomach to hear that stat

about 70% ecocide in just 40 years. I feel like Will offered some important frames in that discussion

around focusing on ecocide rather than climate, how he called it the exploited world rather than the developing world,

and how he believes that policy is still more important than technology in this moment we're in in addressing the ecological crisis.

I also think it's noteworthy how Will appreciates the risks around financialization or commodifying nature,

but still believes that we must, quote, put a Band-Aid on capitalism because the current situation is so dire

and life is so precious in this universe. To learn more, go to Planet.com.

You might also want to check out the conversations we had with Robby Schingler, co-founder of Planet Labs, as well as Tara O'Shea,

who leads forests and land use at Planet Labs. Links are in the show notes.

All of these discussions and more can be found at maearth.com Thanks for tuning in.

Please like share, subscribe, join our community Discord. Let us know what you think. I'll see you on the next one.

<break>First_Interview_Will</break>